hello welcome to the program it's 18 GMT
and Israel's prime minister says a date
has been set for his military's ground
operation in Rafa in southern Gaza that
operation is what US President Joe Biden
has previously called a red line
Benjamin Netanyahu says he's received a
detailed update on the ceasefire talks
underway in Cairo while reiterating
threats of the looming offensive
meanwhile in Southern Gaza Israeli
artillery fire has killed at least eight
Palestinians in cunes civilians
returning to the city have found little
to come back to with many of their homes
destroyed and at the international court
of justice in the hag Nicaragua has
accused Germany of aiding and abetting
genocide being perpetrated in Gaza by
supplying weapons to Israel let's go
straight to Rory Chalin who is an
occupied East Jerusalem Rory let's start
with the Seas fire talks what is the
very latest you're
hearing well I think there has been
cautious optimism uh in the aftermath of
those talks those talks broke up uh
earlier with the delegates uh heading
back to their respective seniors taking
a proposal that had been steered in
large part by the United States now the
cautious optimism I think primarily come
from the Egyptians and the ceries uh
with the cateres saying that this
proposal looked to be a kind of
three-phase deal uh with some of it
focused or the first bit of it focused
on humanitarian issues the Egyptians
saying that the two main sides the
Israelis and the Hamas had agreed on the
kind of broad
proposals but once you got beyond the
Egyptians and the cies I think that
optimism has started to fade
significantly
uh habas has been grumbling that the
Israelis haven't really shifted uh on
their
longstanding insistence that the war
goes on uh and that the Rafa operation
uh will happen uh and uh that there will
be no withdrawal fullscale withdrawal
from Gaza to allow rebuilding to take
place in fact one Hamas official in
Beirut has even said already that that
uh uh ceasefire proposal is being
rejected by the GR group others are
still saying that they're they're going
to carry on looking at it and I think
the Israelis are not particularly
optimistic either y Galan who's the
defense minister has said that there are
difficult decisions uh and we have heard
very recently from Benjamin Netanyahu
the Prime Minister who has been I have
to say non-committal right as you say uh
we've just heard from him in the last
hour or so he is clearly putting
pressure on these talks uh what exactly
has he said RI
well there's clearly a lot of pressure
on Benjamin Netanyahu as well there's
pressure coming from the International
Community most notably the United States
which has taken a much much more active
role uh in this round of negotiations
than it has done in previous uh
instances and Netanyahu is under
pressure from the far right flanks of
his own governing Coalition so yet yet
again those far right flanks have uh
restated
their Line in the Sand essentially which
is that if Benjamin Netanyahu signs up
to a deal that they don't like then
they're going to torpedo his government
they're going to walk away from it and
collapse the government which would
presumably preempt early elections which
the poll suggest that Netanyahu would
lose now as you say
Netanyahu has come out with a statement
on these talks it's a non-committal one
but he has talked about the Rafer
operation let's hear exactly what he had
to say just a short while
ago today I received a detailed report
on the talks in Cairo we are working all
the time to achieve our goals which
includes the release of all of our
hostages and achieving complete victory
over Hamas this Victory requires entry
into Rafa and the elimination of the
terror brigades there it will happen
there is a
date so what we understand is that
prompted by the farri right ministers
there is going to be uh a meeting
tomorrow in Israel of uh the war
cabinets plus uh an expanded Group which
includes uh smotrich and it includes Ben
gavier uh they we can bet are going to
be putting pressure on Benjamin
Netanyahu uh at least to uh to tailor
whatever he signs up to so that it's in
line with their expectations either that
or not sign up to any deal at all so
this peace deal that has been talked
about in Cairo is still very much
hanging in the balance indeed okay thank
you for that Rory Chalin there for us an
occupied East Jerusalem well we can talk
now to paty Kohan she's out the state
department in Washington DC where we've
uh just been getting some new lines
coming from where you are uh Washington
saying it is still opposed to an Israeli
ground operation in Rafa so clearly
uh a bit of a gap here again uh between
what the US is saying and what Israel is
saying talk us through what you're
hearing from the state
department well the briefing is ongoing
I was just in the room and he began by
trying to express all the positive steps
that they think Israel is taking opening
up more border crossings and allowing
more Aiden but at the same time they
said Matt Miller this uh spokesman for
the state department said we've seen
this before it just needs to continue
we'll be judging them on results uh but
he was asked about this date for the
Rafa Invasion and he said that the US to
his knowledge has not been briefed or
been told what that date was and he
reiterated what they've been saying and
what they've been saying to Israeli
officials is that a largescale operation
of Rafa is a bad idea that they would be
extremely opposed to that because they
said you they'd have to move the 1.4
million Palestinians who were told to go
there after repeatedly being uh moved
further and further south uh you'd have
to find a way to get them out of the
area safely and they've said in the past
look there's nowhere safe for them to go
everything is basically demolished so
how would you provide for their food and
their uh clean water and medicines uh so
they again reiterated that it would be a
mistake from their perspective to see a
l large scale Invasion now that said
it's a bit tricky because they're not
saying Israel doesn't have to go after
Hamas in Rafa they believe that that is
a mission that Israel needs to conduct
the question is how do they conduct they
want to see very limited targeted
attacks on Hamas Fighters they had a
meeting a virtual meeting to try and
figure out how that would work
apparently it was rather heated uh but
they will they say we don't want to see
what happened in Gaza City or hanun you
simply can't do a large scale Invasion
when there's 1.4 million people trapped
there and again it's been over the last
couple of days we're hearing much
tougher language Matt Miller saying the
president himself has told the Israeli
Prime Minister is Israel's policies need
to change or ours will so tough talk not
actually threatening any consequences uh
but they are sending the message still
that any large scale Invasion against uh
the people in Rafa would be in their
words a
mistake okay thank you for that uh paty
hhan there for us in Washington